In this video, we're
going to look at some of
the fundamental techniques
for working with charts.
In this example, Rowan
would like to create
a column chart to show
the CO_2 emissions by
different fuel types.
He has prepared the data
by showing snapshots
every 10 years from
1937 to the present.
The first thing you need to
do is to select the data
you want to be included
in your chart,
and it's also very important
that you include the labels.
We're going to select from
here all the way across
to other and not
include our totals.
We're then going to come to
our Insert tab in our ribbon,
and in the middle of the
Insert tab is our chart group,
from which you can choose a
great selection of charts.
If you have the
Recommended Charts option,
which is available in the
newer versions of Excel,
that's really worth having
a look at as it will
often give you the chart
type that you want.
If you're working with an
older version of Excel,
however, you may not have it.
We're going to do
it the manual way.
Now to create a column chart,
you come to the
column chart icon,
click the drop-down,
and then choose
the column or bar chart you want.
In this case, a 2-D
clustered column.
There is, however,
a keyboard shortcut that
you can use as well,
and that is Alt+F1,
and that gives you
a clustered column,
which is great, where there is
a cluster of columns
for each row.
Now probably the first
thing you want to do
is move and resize your chart.
When moving, do be careful
not to select a
piece of the chart,
because then you'll
just move that piece,
in which case immediately undo.
Stay near the edges of
the chart and then
just click and drag.
To resize, you can use any of
the resize handles and
you just click and
drag away from the
middle to make it
bigger or towards the
middle to make it smaller,
and there is our chart.
But there is one
immediate problem,
our years have not appeared on
our x-axis/ if you look closely,
they've actually
appeared as a series,
and that's because
they are numbers,
and as far as Excel is concerned,
if it sees a number,
it tries to chart it.
One of the first things
we're going to do
is we have to address this issue.
Now we need to remove year as
a series and there's
a really quick way
that you can do that.
You'll notice all the data
is surrounded by a blue box.
If I come to the corner
and click and drag,
I can actually change
what data is included.
I've removed it as a series,
but now I need to
add it as labels.
Now with your chart selected,
you will notice you
have two new ribbons.
The names vary across
different versions of Excel,
in this version, it's
called chart design.
In older versions, you may
see chart tools design,
either way, please click on
this ribbon and then
come to Select Data.
The Select Data dialog allows
you to manage exactly what
data is or isn't
included in your chart.
You could see, I could go and
add and remove series over here.
But more importantly, we can
change our horizontal
axis labels.
I'm going to click "Edit"
and then you literally
just select the labels
you want to see included,
and it's fixed already.
I'm just going to say
"Okay", and "Okay. "
Now it's quite possible that
having created your chart,
you look at it and decide
that a different chart
type might be better,
and certainly with
this many data sets,
this graphic is looking
a little bit busy.
Let's have a look at
another alternative.
We're going to come up to
our Chart Design ribbon
and we're going to
click "Change Chart
Type" and we can swap this for
any chart type that will
support this type of data,
and a stacked column in this
case may be a better option.
Do be careful there's also
100 percent stacked column,
and that shows the stack
out of 100 percent,
and that's not what we want.
Make sure you've got
a stacked column
and then say "Okay."
What this has done is taken
all of your little
clustered columns
and pile them on top of each
other so you can still
see the breakdown,
but you can also
more easily compare
the total emissions for
each year represented.
Now let's talk about making
our chart look a
little bit nicer.
To begin with, on your
Chart Design tab,
you'll see a gallery of styles,
and as you hover over
these different styles,
it gives you a preview.
If you want even more options,
you can click the drop down and
you'll see even more
options in there.
These are really
good quick options,
but we're going to
do them manually so
you can see all the alternatives.
First of all, my legend,
it looks fine, but I'd like
to change the position.
I'm going to come to
this little green plus
to the right of my chart,
and this shows me all the
different components.
From here, I can switch
them off altogether,
which I don't want to
switch my legend off,
so I'm going to turn it back on,
and if I click the little black
arrow to the right of it,
you'll see I can
change the position.
If I were to move it to
the left, for example,
you'll see it adjust the
whole chart accordingly.
But I'd like to
see it at the top.
Now I should probably also
change my chart title.
Your chart title would normally
show by default, but again,
if it doesn't, you
can always just turn
it on in the Chart
Elements dialogue.
Clicking into my "Chart Title",
I'm actually going to need
to replace this text.
If you highlight
and press "Delete",
you may delete your
title by mistake,
so I suggest rather
press "Control A"
to select everything
and just over type.
I'm just going to type
in Emissions by Fuel,
and then you can just click away.
Another thing I'd like to
address is my vertical axis.
Because the numbers are so large,
these numbers are actually
quite hard to understand,
so I'm going to click on my
"Vertical Axis," and if you
want even more options than
available from the plus,
you can either right-click
Format or just double-click,
and that will open up
a panel on the right,
and this gives you the
full range of options
for changing the components
within your chart.
Now first of all, please
select the Axis Options,
which is the little bar icon,
and then we go to open
up Access Options,
and the one we want to
change is the Display Units.
These are such big numbers that
I'm actually going
to set to billions.
Not only is it much
more readable now,
but it's also put
in a label for me.
That was just one of many option,
I encourage you to explore
and see what else
you can do in here.
Let's make one final
aesthetic tweak.
I would like to make each of
these bars a little wider,
so I'm going to
select one series,
it doesn't matter which, and
that switches the gray panel
over to show me
the formatting options
for my data series.
The gap width between these
columns is really wide,
so I'm going to change
it to 50 percent,
which reduces the gap width and
thus increases the
width of each column,
and I think that
looks much nicer now.
One more thing Rowan wants to do,
he'd like to include his
percentage increase
in this chart.
Now previously we saw how we
could just adjust this area,
but that only works with data
that's right next to each other,
obviously this is not
sitting with that data.
We can come to select
data and edit from there,
but there's quite a neat trick
which is not as obvious,
which I'd like to show you.
We're actually going to
select the data from H3,
including the heading and
right down to 16 percent,
and I'm going to copy,
Control C and then I'm
just going to click on
the edge of the chart so it's
selected and I'm going to paste,
Control V. That has
actually added my
percentage increase,
but I can't see it,
and the reason for that is
these numbers are
going up in billions,
whereas my percentage increases
are all less than one,
so the values are so tiny that
I can't actually see them.
In order to compare data
of different units,
what you need to do is
to put in a second axis,
and the easiest way to do
that is to come to Chart Design,
come to Change Chart Type,
and right at the
bottom, choose Combo.
Now it switched everything to
clustered column for a moment,
don't worry about that,
we're just going to scroll down,
and we actually like our other to
go back to being
a stacked column,
and you'll see when you do that,
it switches everything
else back to stacked.
We do want our percentage
increase to be a line,
but the important
thing is we want
that to be on a secondary axis.
I'm going to tick and say "Okay."
Now it has created
a secondary axis showing
our percentages,
and we can see our
percentage increase
along with our billion
tons of emissions.
There's our finished chart which
is now looking very great.